Since the beginning of the digital era, music streaming services have steadily risen as the go-to means of listening to music. These services give people full access to various songs and albums on computers or mobile devices, without having to purchase or download content. Most streaming services, such as Spotify, Apple Music, and Youtube Music, only require an Internet connection and the purchase of a subscription-based plan to be used. Their features include playlists that are specially tailored to a certain mood, genre, activity, or popularity, as well as music suggestions based on user activity; effectively providing people with a more convenient and personalized way of listening to music in comparison to physical singles and albums.


The rise of music streaming services has caused shifts in the music industry, essentially marking them as disruptive technologies. These are innovations that greatly change how consumers and businesses function by displacing previously established systems in an industry; customer demands are altered according to the new technology, and businesses have to adapt in order to retain their customers. In this case, with music streaming services being offered online, the physical CD and album industry is affected the most.


The merits of streaming have, for some time now, been repeatedly emphasized and even glorified. Audiences have cheap and legal access to virtually all the music they desire: for the price of one CD per month, we can now subscribe to a streaming service and listen to the equivalent of hundreds of CDs a month. Musicians, in turn, were to gain from the direct access to audiences that streaming gave them, all the while cutting production costs and bypassing the obstacles that intermediaries and gatekeepers represented. No longer would “being signed” depict the only way to get noticed and succeed. No longer would getting noticed be correlated with financial investment. From a free market perspective, and in an idealistic democratic world of online radios, musicians were simply to find their audience by their talent and by the attractiveness of their creation. In similarity to the so-called “filter bubble” in Google and Youtube wherein its features are tailored to the likes of the audience (e.g: recommended videos, top suggested search results, etc.), the cultivation of music streaming services has become beneficial in curating a better experience for the listener in consuming products. Different songs and artists have been categorized by website moderators according to what one user or what one’s friend listens to in terms of genre, mood, or type. This then provides a wider space of exploring newly put out content or promoted content in the category of “similar tracks”.


The effect that music streaming services has on physical albums and song sales led the music industry to shift their focus away from that. This is evident from the 2018 year-end report figures from BuzzAngle, a data company that tracks music consumption. The report showed that album and song sales went down to 18.2% and 28.8% respectively, meanwhile, total on-demand music streams shot up to 35.4%. Furthermore, their data report showed that 77% of the music that U.S. fans listen to was through music-streaming services while the remaining 17.3% and 5.7% were through albums and single sales respectively.


In a 2019 survey conducted by Deezer, a streaming service, 42% of the 2,000 adults that were surveyed in the UK create playlists of their favorite songs. The majority of those under 25 years old were found to be “more likely to arrange their music into playlists than listen to an album” from start to finish, while 15% of the people in that age group have never listened to a full album. Though these results are limited to the U.K. only, there’s no doubt that music streaming services have changed how music is consumed overall.


Due to the rising popularity of streaming services, it impacted how artists and bands release their music. Mark Mulligan, a music industry analyst who believes that the album and its format have been slowly dying off for years, stated:


“[The digital transformation and a world of competing media] had created an appetite for “post-album artists” who release their music as a continuous series of singles, a format more suited to the short-attention-span generation.”


Several musicians like Tinie Tempah and the Cult’s Ian Austbury have acknowledged the album’s apparent decline, the former having stated to be uncertain if another album will come out after the third while the latter declared the format to be dead. Though Fraser T. Smith, a Grammy-winning producer, believed that albums “would remain resilient and relevant owing to a select few artists.”


Another way in which music streaming services interfere with its artists and listeners is how algorithms on recommending musical work affect the amounts of pay earned by artists through streaming. An article published by Nikoghosyan (2019) entails that services and prices differ by platform, but the principle is the same: online radios and streaming services such as Spotify, Rhapsody and Last.fm allow us to listen to whatever we like, whenever we like without having to own a hard copy.


Chris Anderson (2012) explains this mechanism in detail while asserting that the future of the cultural industry lies in the potential brought by digitalisation. According to Anderson, online shops and streaming services – be it in music, film or publishing – have given rise to new markets and provided audiences with cultural products unavailable in traditional retail stores mostly due to lack of physical space and high costs of stocking. In the early 2000s, the online radio Rhapsody provided access to almost 20 times more music than Wal-Mart, whereas about 22% of the music found on Rhapsody was unavailable in any other retail store. The titles available online but not offline are what Anderson calls the “long tail” of the music industry. These lesser known songs still attract audiences and can therefore be lucrative, though less than the hits of the moment. Furthermore, some of these songs may even themselves become hits and success stories of the “long tail”, just as the band Arctic Monkeys famously used the Internet and file-sharing websites to promote itself before getting signed.


Many may argue if albums are truly dying, replaced by the streaming of singles and playlists, but there’s no denying that music streaming services are dominating in terms of music consumption especially in this digital era. And seeing and experiencing for ourselves its ascent to the top, it is no doubt causing disruption along the way, therefore qualifying it as a disruptive innovation. As said by George Ergatoudis, “the digital revolution is transforming the industry and that is unstoppable, whether we like it is irrelevant.”



References:

Ellis-Petersen, H. (2014, July 29). Album spins closer towards its final track as a viable format. The Guardian. Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/29/album-music-format-streaming-playlists-extinction?fbclid=IwAR0ryG8RmtkqayKtV4vXiBKamH3uJAhRsgHTT1HZEtX3Q8UX1wLEz-ryjrs

King, A. (2019, October 4). Are Albums Dying? — 15% of Music Fans Under 25 Have Never Listened to a Full Album. Digital News Music. Retrieved from https://www.digitalmusicnews.com/2019/10/04/are-albums-dying/?fbclid=IwAR0VEOFDgV_23J76jGqpx8nYfV6ZA-7PyP2wHn0eCBkaJHKJzpZjOAKmN-M

Nikoghosyan, N. (2019, February 25). What streaming does to musical work. Hypotheses. Retrieved from https://wim.hypotheses.org/982

Rouse, M. (2016, December 20). Disruptive technology. WhatIs. Retrieved from https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/disruptive-technology?amp=1

Slavik, N. (2018, February 12). Is the Album Dying? A DJBooth Debate. DJ Booth. Retrieved from https://djbooth.net/features/2016-11-18-album-dying-debate?fbclid=IwAR3tHjEMkm85NnlP2WKTyIcQXdx5KbN0r76BWqtAKmlIzg_PlPACh_825Tg

Wang, A. X. (2019, January 3). Album Sales Are Dying as Fast as Streaming Services Are Rising. Rolling Stone. Retrieved from https://www.rollingstone.com/pro/news/album-sales-dying-as-fast-as-streaming-services-rising-774563/?fbclid=IwAR39pGP23AB4-b3ugrgl-1UqAKoyuQlA2bO6Ls0o6REhkCSbpDCn7ynTQE0
